[instrumental music]
(Zack)
'Ouch.'
'I'm telling you, I can't take'
'much more of this.'
Just a little longer.
It is necessary.
Yeah, says who?
'Mr. Allan, you are now
the head of security.'
The rest of the command staff
accepted Delenn's gift
of these new uniforms.
Do you not wish to fit in?
Oh, I never have before,
why should I start now.
Besides, this stuff itches.
What-what is this, anyway?
The fabrics all have different
names and purposes.
The stitching on the center
panel is Zerka thread.
It's very difficult to obtain.
It's grown on a few small
ceremonial plants in Minbar.
It still itches.
It is an honor
to wear Zerka fabric.
Well, it doesn't sit right
on my shoulders. Here, look.
It looks fine.
Oh, yeah, I should listen
to a Minbari about fashion.
[Zack chuckles]
'I mean, robes, hoods.'
I mean, no offense, but..
...I've seen Vorlons
with more fashion sense.
Ouch, hey!
She did that on purpose.
Yes, I believe she did.
I will deal with this.
[speaking in Minbari]
Yeah, and don't you forget it.
Mr. Allan, if I may observe.
Your problem
with the new uniform
is not the new uniform, is it?
Eh, I don't know.
I just feel like
if I take his uniform
I'm admitting the chief's
never coming back to his job.
And I wish I could wait
a little longer.
But the captain says,
it's important for things
to get back to normal,
but that won't happen
until the chief's
back where he belongs.
And if Mr. Garibaldi
does not take back his job?
He will.
[instrumental music]
Delenn.
Are you ready to leave?
I, uh..
...I wish to request
another day.
I need to be with John
for a little while
when we are not both,
distracted and occupied.
Will you tell him
you're leaving?
Yes.
But not why.
That is, of course,
your decision
but were I in your position
I would tell Sheridan the truth.
He should know that if
the dreaming does not go well
you will not be allowed
to return to him.
[instrumental music]
(Lennier)
It was the year of fire.
(Zack)
The year of destruction.
(G'Kar)
The year we took back
what was ours.
(Lyta)
It was the year of rebirth.
(Vir)
The year of great sadness.
(Marcus)
The year of pain..
(Delenn)
And the year of joy.
(Londo)
It was a new age.
(Franklin)
It was the end of history.
(Ivanova)
It was the year
everything changed.
(Garibaldi)
The year is 2261.
The place..
(Sheridan)
Babylon 5.
[theme music]
[music continues]
[instrumental music]
[machine beeps]
- Ivanova here.
- 'Commander.'
(female #1)
'Maintenance wants to know when'
'you can meet with them about
equipment shortages.'
Um, tell them we'll
have to do it tomorrow.
The Drazi ambassador invited me
to some religious festival.
It's supposed to be a hell
of a party. I'm on my way now.
Nice and easy now.
Nice and easy.
There we go.
Local anesthetic
still holding out?
Mm-hm, more or less.
I think I've got It.
Just as long as
it isn't in backwards.
I've peered into my own soul
more than enough lately.
Alright, I need you to
close both your eyes
for a moment
and open them slowly
when I tell you.
I'm going to lower
the lights now
so don't worry if you
can't see much at first.
Now I'm activating
the prosthetic eye.
Aah! Ohh!
Are you alright?
It burned for a moment.
That's the last relay
cutting into place
should be the worst of it.
'Oh.'
Now..
...open your eyes.
'Slowly.'
'Take your time.'
'That's it.'
'There you go.'
How does it feel?
The burning has stopped.
Can you see me?
Yes.
Not as well as before,
but, yes, I can see you.
Mm. It'll take
some getting used to.
- Uh, G'Kar.
- Huh?
Because the eye was made
for humans, not Narns
I had to make some temporary
adjustments for it to work.
- It is not my proper color.
- 'Oh, I can take care of that.'
We'll continue to adjust it
over the next
couple of weeks
as you get used to it.
Now the important thing is..
...that it works.
Oh, yes.
It uses a lot of energy
so you'll have to take it out
at night and recharge it.
- This can be removed?
- Yes, yes.
The area behind it's completely
sealed, so it is safe.
Just wash the eye carefully
before you put it back in.
And you will have to turn it off
when you take it out
otherwise it will continue to
send images to the neural net
at the back of your eye
and that could be disorienting.
It-it-it can work,
outside of me?
Yes.
Interesting.
[computer beeps]
Excuse me. Franklin, go.
(Sheridan)
'Doc, can you swing by
my office in about an hour?'
'I need to talk to you
about a few things.'
'And bring Marcus with you.'
Will do.
Yes, very interesting indeed.
[laughs]
- What the--
- Don't...even, ask.
[chuckles]
(Delenn)
'Yes?'
It's me. Uh, I heard you
wanted to see me.
I was just on my way to..
Delenn?
Where did you say
you were going?
I was, uh..
I was just going to..
[chuckles]
Nowhere that can't wait
for a little while.
Is there some occasion
I should know about?
No, I just thought
when I finish getting ready
you could join me for dinner.
We haven't gone out for dinner
in a very long time.
It, um..
...also occurred to me..
As I told you,
it is tradition for Minbari
to spend three nights together.
The female--
Watches, and the male sleeps
until his true face
is revealed, I know.
Uh, whatever you see
in a face mashed against
a pillow and drooling,
I don't know, but, uh
I try not to be judgmental
about alien cultures
when they are dressed like that.
But what does this
have to do with, um..
Our first night together
was on the White Star.
Our second, in your quarters
before you left for Z'ha'dum.
If we are going to be complete
you owe me a third night.
Tonight?
Um, that's-that's
gonna be a bad time.
I've got late meetings.
I can wait.
Something is up, isn't it?
Wha..
I'm going back to Minbar
tomorrow.
I may be there for some time.
Anything serious?
If I can help, I--
No, no, just some old business
I must attend to, but, uh..
It may, uh, take me away
from here for some time.
It matters to me a great deal
that we finish this, John.
Alright.
I'll, uh..
I'll be here at,
uh, 7:00 for dinner.
I'll, uh, I'll see you then.
[instrumental music]
For the past couple of weeks
President Clark's been
beating the crap out of us
with his propaganda war.
The problem
with the big lie is that
if you repeat it long enough
people start to believe it
and we can't let that happen.
So, we're gonna have
to start going
against him sooner
than we thought.
You know that's what they want.
They're trying to provoke us
into moving before we're ready.
I know, but if we wait too long
we won't be able
to move at all.
They'll have wiped out whatever
credibility we have left.
And this quarantine
is making things
even more difficult for us.
I mean, with all direct traffic
to earth cut off
every signal being intercepted.
I mean, we are blind,
deaf, and stranded.
Well, if we can't go through
them, let's go around them.
Establish some alternate lines
of communication and transit.
Exactly.
And that's where
you two come in.
I need you to meet with our
allies in the Mars colony.
Start coordinating things
make sure they are ready to help
and then let them know
where we stand.
Now, I'd prefer
to do this myself
but they've got my face
on every wanted poster
from here to Proxima Centauri.
Well, why us?
Because the resistance
will need to know
they're dealing
with someone credible.
And you can represent
the command staff
without drawing
too much attention.
Now, Marcus here will go
along as a bodyguard.
It's gonna be a very long trip.
With all direct
shipping routes cut off
we'll have to take
the long way around.
Change ships every other day
to prevent anyone
from becoming suspicious.
I figure it's gonna take two,
two an a half weeks each way.
Better get going.
I've uploaded the information
on your contacts
in the resistance
in your personal files.
Now don't tell anyone
where you're going.
I trust our people,
but let's not push our luck.
Any questions?
Good.
I'll see you when you get back.
Alright.
- Captain.
- Hm.
I saw that report on ISN
about your father being missing.
Now, I know Mars
is a long way away
but, uh, since we're there
I-I thought I could,
ask some questions.
No.
Our resources are spread
thin enough as it is.
I won't use them
for personal inquiries.
That's why they broadcast
that information.
They've probably got
Nightwatch all over town.
If our people show up, they'll
be arrested, interrogated..
[sighs]
No.
Sheridans are survivors,
always have been.
If they had my dad,
they'd have said so
found some way
to use him against me.
But they didn't.
So it means he's still free.
But we can't afford to waste
any more time, Steven
for his sake and ours.
Good luck.
[instrumental music]
I wondered if you were going to
leave without telling me.
My place..
...is at your side, Delenn.
- Not tonight.
- Always.
If you go, you will
learn things about me
that may change
your opinion of me.
Delenn, I have pledged
myself to your side
come fire or storm
or darkness or death.
Can understanding
be a greater danger?
In this case..
...yes.
They're waiting for us.
[instrumental music]
[bells chiming]
Delenn, you understand
why you have been
brought here
to stand before your clan?
I do.
In the long history
of our world no Minbari
has ever taken an off-worlder
as lover or mate.
It has been forbidden
since our people first made
contact with other species.
Without consultation or approval
from the other members
of your own clan
'you made yourself genetically
compatible with the humans'
and have now embraced one of
them as a prospective mate.
This has caused us
concern.
I must follow the calling
of my heart.
What affects only you
is your decision
but not if it affects
the history
and laws and rules
of our society.
We must determine if it is
the calling of your heart
or something else.
What else could there be?
That is what we must discover.
We have gathered the leaders
of your clan to hear your case.
You will tell us why
you should be allowed
to continue on the path
you have chosen.
If we decide to end
your relationship with the human
you must give us your word that
you will honor our decision.
I will abide
by the decision of my clan.
We are not trying
to be cruel, Delenn.
We want to help you
understand yourself.
Why you have done this
and if it is truly
the right thing for you
and for our world.
If I say I love him..
...is that not enough?
No, you must convince us
on other grounds.
But what other grounds
could there be?
If you set the rules
and you have already
decided that this is wrong
what hope do I have
of convincing you?
That is what you must discover.
You may find you have reasons
for what you are doing
that you do not even realize.
You may even find that
they are the wrong reasons.
It will be difficult
but what you have
asked us to accept
is equally difficult.
It will begin by purifying
your thoughts.
You will enter the dreaming.
We will speak again
when you emerge.
Is there a second who will stay
with her through the dreaming
protect her and guide her?
I will.
Then we will prepare
the whisper gallery.
[bells chiming]
[instrumental music]
[door clatters]
D-Delenn..
You have..
...entered the dreaming before?
Only once..
Before I joined
the Grey council.
I was protector..
...and guide for another.
Who?
Dukhat.
He, who was the greatest of us.
I was an Acolyte.
I was inexperienced.
I was terrified.
[instrumental music]
I am alive.
I'm sorry, master, I..
...I didn't mean to intrude.
You were not breathing, and..
Of course I was.
Sit beside me.
What was your name, child?
Delenn.
Yes.
Of the family of Mir?
Yes, master.
You have a proud heritage,
Delenn of Mir
prouder than you know.
There is nothing to fear
in the dreaming
only that which
we bring with us.
The dreaming takes us forward
and the dreaming takes us back.
Walk with me
in the dreaming, Delenn.
[music continues]
[zapping]
[explosion]
[sobbing]
[screaming]
Delenn?
Delenn, I'm here, Delenn.
I won't leave you.
No matter what?
(Lennier)
No matter what.
[instrumental music]
Delenn.
- Master?
- Come with me.
[instrumental music]
Have you ever before
stood in the presence
of the Grey Council, Delenn?
No, master.
And do you consider yourself
their equal in wisdom
judgment, maturity,
and intelligence?
No. No, of course not.
Master, if I said
or did anything--
You will speak
when you are addressed.
For two days
we have been debating
an issue of
some small importance.
We have from time to time
heard of a race,
known as humans.
The Centauri have had dealings
with them for some time.
They're reportedly
primitive, passionate..
...dangerous.
The question..
...do we establish contact
with these humans?
They have each said no
all for different reasons.
Would you like to hear them?
Perhaps another might
be better suited to.
The correct answer is yes.
Yes.
The worker caste fears
their position will be weakened
by more sources of food
and alien artifacts.
The religious caste
is worried about
the impact of strange,
primitive ideas.
And the warrior caste says
we should have nothing to do
with violent, inferior cultures
they are a waste of our time
and resources.
What do you say?
I'm, I'm not qualified to judge.
You are an Acolyte
ten years out of temple
with a head full of notions.
You have been trained
to think and believe.
Now put them to work.
Step into the circle
and answer my question.
Valen said
"The greatest enemy
is the one you do not know.
"You can predict
the actions of those
"who are familiar to you.
"The one you cannot predict
is the one who can harm you."
And what do you say?
If we do not know these humans
then they're a mystery to us.
If the universe puts a mystery
in front of us as a gift
politeness requires that we
at least try to solve it.
Aha!
You're curious.
You'd like to know
to simply understand.
Simple curiosity.
Ministers and counselors
and warriors..
...and not one of you
has the sense of curiosity
of a simple Acolyte.
Are you so jaded, so superior,
so smug in your complacency
that you have lost
the simplest of joys
that of the child
and the closed box?
Leave me.
Continue your meditations.
We'll discuss this again
tomorrow.
[instrumental music]
You look as if
you've been terrified
into another
and better incarnation.
Come.
Walk with me.
Master..
...may I ask a question?
- Will you make contact?
- No.
The council will be
even more determined now.
I could override their decision,
but nothing would be served.
Authority should never
be used as a club, Delenn.
But then why?
When others do a foolish thing
you should tell them
it is a foolish thing.
They can still continue to do it
but at least the truth
is where it needs to be.
They will be most upset
with you now.
You have embarrassed them.
I apologize for that.
In my anger, I believe
I may have caused you
more problems in the future.
No, no, master.
It was an honor.
Don't interrupt
when I'm being kind.
It does not happen often,
Delenn.
Raise your eyes and look at me.
It is disrespectful.
I cannot have an aide
who will not look up.
'You will be forever
walking into things.'
Your aide?
Your spirit is strong.
And since I have now
alienated everyone else
who would be your mentor?
I will teach you myself.
We'll begin your
training tomorrow
after the council has once again
explained its wisdom to me.
(Dukhat)
'Where this will all end,
I don't know.'
'But there are still many years'
'ahead of us in which
to find out.'
'I suspect the journey'
'will be a curious
and fascinating one.'
'It always is.'
(Delenn)
'I am become Grey.'
I stand between the darkness..
...and the light.
Between the candle..
...and the star.
I was passing by
on my way to sleep.
But I wanted to congratulate
you again
on being accepted
into the Grey Council.
I am very proud of you, Delenn.
You've come so far.
Thanks to you.
Everything I am
everything I shall ever be
I owe to you.
I'm not so sure.
You seem troubled. Why?
When I touched the Triluminary
it glowed briefly.
From your reaction
may I assume that it
hasn't done that before?
It confirmed something I've have
suspected for some time.
The Triluminaries
were a gift from Valen.
They came to us from long ago
a thousand years in our past.
There is a story
that they also came to us
from a time far in our future.
Until today, I wasn't sure.
Now that you are
with the Grey Council
you should know I did not
choose you by accident.
There was a purpose
in my selection.
Your heritage..
That's strange.
Come.
[bells chiming]
What is it?
We detected these alien ships
approaching our space.
I've never seen those markings
before, who are they?
- 'Unknown, master.'
- I believe they are the humans.
I have investigated them
on my own.
They have tried to contact us
but we do not understand
their language.
As is our custom, we are
approaching with gun ports open.
By whose order?
Master, that is the tradition
of the warrior caste.
A gesture of strength
and respect.
They can see our weapons,
they can see
we approach them open-handed.
Master, there.
Soul Hunters.
Soul Hunters come,
only where there's great death.
- Close the gun ports.
- If we do not provoke them..
[zapping]
[explosion]
Somebody, help me!
Help me!
[indistinct chatter]
[sobbing]
Delenn, we need to strike back
but the council is divided.
Do we follow them back
to their base and take revenge
or do we wait, try to find out
what happened?
'Yours is the deciding vote,
Delenn.'
He was the best of us.
They struck without provocation.
There was no reason.
Animals!
Brutal!
They deserve no mercy.
Strike them down!
Follow them to their base and
and kill them, all of them!
All of them!
No mercy!
Then it was your order
that began our war
with the humans.
Yes.
The council was divided.
Mine was the deciding vote.
They killed Dukhat.
I was furious.
I never knew myself
capable of such rage.
All I could see was death.
Is this what you were afraid
I would see?
Then you were not thinking
clearly, Delenn.
The fault is not yours.
The humans misinterpreted
the gesture of respect.
They thought it to be
a prelude to an attack.
You were..
The one who gave the order.
Nothing can change that,
Lennier.
Our brothers?
Dead.
They have been avenged,
at least in part.
The greater debt
will be paid soon.
Word of the attack has spread
throughout Minbar.
Our people have gone mad
with grief and rage.
We told them no mercy..
...as they showed us no mercy.
No mercy..
...but perhaps wisdom.
Are you changing
your vote, Delenn?
I was enraged, grief stricken.
I didn't consider my words.
Both sides have now
endured great loss.
Perhaps there is time
to avoid even greater loss.
We can at least try
to speak to them.
- Find another way.
- It's too late.
It's a holy war now, Delenn.
It has taken on a life
of it's own.
We are a world gone mad
and it is only our rage that
gives us purpose any longer.
That rage cannot be stopped
it can only exhaust
itself in blood!
He was right.
We should have made contact
with the humans.
A moment of rage.
I have spent the last
ten years of my life
trying to make up for it.
And that is why you have agreed
to become one with Sheridan.
You're still grieving
for your actions
still guilty over the death
of so many humans
trying to atone
for your mistake.
You cannot believe that.
Not after we've been
through so much.
- You've seen.
- Yes, I have.
And, no, I do not believe it
but we cannot lie
about the dreaming.
And when we tell them
what the dreaming has shown us
this is what they will say
and that is what
they will believe.
But why would the dreaming
show me this of all things?
Why this?
The dreaming is finished.
You must rest now.
In the morning you will tell us
what you have seen.
Then we will
render our decision.
[instrumental music]
I cannot have an aide
who will not look up.
(Dukhat)
You have a proud heritage,
Delenn of Mir.
Prouder than you know.
You should know I did not choose
you by accident.
Somebody, help me!
Help me!
There was a purpose
in my selection.
Your heritage.
[intense music]
Delenn?
Delenn, what are you doing?
- Going back.
- This cannot be allowed!
The dreaming is over.
We must now wait until morning.
No, we are going back,
and you are going with us.
Do you want to see?
Do you want to know the truth?
Then come and see,
touch and feel what I have seen.
Then you'll understand.
[dramatic music]
This is not as things
are done, Delenn.
You know this.
Take it.
There's nothing to fear
in the dreaming.
Only that which
we bring with us.
Walk with me in the dreaming,
Callenn.
[zapping]
Somebody, help me!
Help me!
[indistinct chattering]
(Delenn)
I could not hear him then.
This is what the dreaming
wanted me to see.
Listen.
There was a purpose
in my selection.
Your heritage.
Listen.
You are..
...a child of Valen.
[gasps]
Did you hear?
I heard.
A child of Valen.
Did you get the records?
The guards resisted at first.
The Grey Council has disbanded
but their security remains.
I managed to explain
matters to them.
They will recover in time.
Many of our records were lost
during the last great war
a thousand years ago
but some were kept
in the archives
of the Grey Council.
This proves what I suspected.
Do you wish to see?
Delenn, I-I'm not sure
I understand.
Valen, who created
the Grey Council
defeated the Shadows.
A Minbari not born of Minbari
we know was Jeffrey Sinclair,
a human who became Minbari
genetically altered
by the Triluminary
he received from Epsilon III.
Little is known of his
activities after the war.
Even his death
remains a mystery.
His body never found.
But Dukhat knew.
Dukhat had seen these records.
We knew that after his change
human and Minbari souls
began to merge.
But that was not all
that merged.
Valen was still partly human
as I am partly Minbari.
After the war, Valen married
and had children.
They left Minbar to escape
those who would persecute them.
After Valen died, his children
returned to Minbar.
They married
and had more children.
Human DNA entered into our race.
And over a thousand years
how many of our people
carry his legacy?
They cannot be counted.
You knew, didn't you?
You would destroy
the purity of our race!
I could not let it happen again!
But our race is not pure!
Many of our people
carry human DNA
in our blood and in our cells.
I'm one of them.
That's why the Triluminary
glowed when I touched it.
It was programmed
for Sinclair's DNA
and a trace of that
is still within me.
That will be my defense.
If I am not pure Minbari
it doesn't matter
if I marry Sheridan.
My children will never be
pure Minbari either way
so there is nothing to lose.
No.
Delenn, I beg of you
if others knew of this
it would cause great confusion.
It must remain secret
for the good of everyone.
You demanded,
I show you a reason.
I have done so.
Wait!
'There is another way.'
It was our tradition, long ago
when we still warred
amongst ourselves..
...after the war was over
each side would give
one of its own
to the other in marriage.
The victorious side
gave a female of its clan
to the one that lost
that suffered the most deaths
'as a symbol of life and hope.'
We..
I...can explain this
to our people
as a similar offering
to the humans
who died during our war.
You are willing
to pledge yourself
as a symbol of life.
It is a great sacrifice
I imagine.
[instrumental music]
- Hey.
- John.
What, what are you doing here?
Well, I just I-I heard that
your ship was docking
and I wanted to make sure
you were on it.
I'll go and see to our things,
Delenn.
Captain.
Well, is everything
alright back home?
Did you take care
of whatever was you where
going to deal with?
Yes.
Everything's fine now.
Uh-huh.
And you're still not going to
tell me what it was, are you?
Anything happen
while I was gone?
Ah, not much.
Franklin and Marcus are still
on route to Mars.
Been about a week.
Have you heard from them
recently?
Not in about three days.
But we figured they'd be
out of touch, though.
Knowing those two guys, probably
stopping off to see the sights
'turn it into a real vacation.'
Is this really the best ship
you could find?
Yes.
Smells like the inside
of a Martian pleasure dome
on Sunday morning.
Wouldn't know about that.
Look, don't make me
come over there
and take that thing from you.
Helps me relax.
Marcus, this is the kind
of conversation
that can only end in a gunshot.
Would you like me
to sing instead?
No.
- You haven't heard me.
- Marcus, please.
♪ I am the very model
of a modern Major General ♪
♪ I've information vegetable
animal and mineral ♪
♪ I know the Kings of England ♪
♪ And I quote the fact
historical ♪
♪ From Marathon to Waterloo ♪
♪ In order categorical ♪
♪ I'm very well acquainted too
with matters mathematical ♪
♪ I understand equations.. ♪♪
♪ I am the very model
of a modern Major General ♪
♪ I've information vegetable
animal and mineral ♪
♪ I know the Kings of England ♪
♪ And I quote the fact
historical ♪
♪ From Marathon to Waterloo ♪
in order categorical ♪
♪ I'm very well acquainted too
with matters mathematical ♪
♪ I understand equations ♪
♪ About the simple
and quadratical ♪
♪ About binomial theorem
I'm teaming with a lot of news ♪
♪ With many cheerful facts about
the square of the hypotenuse ♪
♪ Very cheerful facts about
♪ Many cheerful facts about the
square of the hypotenuse ♪
[Franklin screams]
♪ I'm very well acquainted
to it.. ♪♪
- 'Cut.'
- 'What! [bleep]'